# Modulatory effects of the truncated isoforms on glutamate transporter oligomerization identified by computational analysis of gene-centric isoform maps

Abstract

Glutamate transporters play a key role in central nervous system physiology by maintaining excitatory neurotransmitter homeostasis. Biological assemblies of the transporters, consisting of cyclic homotrimers, emerge as a crucial aspect of glutamate transporter modulation. Hence targeting heteromerization promises an effective approach for modulator design. On the other hand, the dynamic nature of transcription allows for the generation of transporter isoforms in structurally distinct manners. In this study, the potential isoforms were identified through the analysis of computationally generated gene-centric isoform maps. The conserved features of isoform sequences were revealed by computational chemistry methods and subsequent structural analysis of AlphaFold2 predictions. Truncated isoforms were further subjected to a wide range of docking analyses, 50ns molecular dynamics simulations, and evolutionary coupling analyses. Energetic landscapes of isoform-canonical transporter complexes suggested an inhibitory role of truncated isoforms on glutamate transporter bio-assembly. Moreover, isoforms that mimic the trimerization domain (in particular, TM2 helices) exhibited strong interactions with canonical transporters, underscoring the role of transmembrane helices in isoform interactions. Additionally, self-assembly dynamics observed in truncated isoforms mimicking canonical TM5 helices indicate a potential protective role against unwanted interactions with canonical transporters. Our computational studies on glutamate transporters offer insights into the roles of alternative splicing on cellular signaling, neurotransmission, and identifies potential drug targets for physiological or pathological processes.

Key Words: Truncated isoforms, Membrane protein design, Protein 3D structural predictions, Water-soluble integral membrane proteins. 



